\

\
\

***The Missing College Fair: College-Readiness Resource Inequality in North Carolina High Schools***

*Clara Schwamm*

\
\

Resource inequality in schools has been identified as a serious issue in
education for decades. A 1964 report on the inequality of Development in
Appalachia as compared to the rest of the United States expounded upon
education disparities, among others. "It [the Appalachian region] has
not provided a sufficient corps of educated persons in the past – it
lacks the tax base to provide an adequate education effort in the
future," (Appalachian Regional Commission 1964). The Appalachia Report
demonstrates the analytic of Development at a smaller scale, but this
ethnographic essay aims to focus on an even more localized area in a
more specialized topic: two North Carolina high schools' efforts to
prepare potential first generation college students for higher
education. Through my research, I identified the likelihood that schools
with more funding and greater access to resources in their surrounding
areas are able to provide more college-readiness resources for their
rising first generation college students.

Hamilton High School in Orange County and Taylor's Creek High School in
Cumberland County seem as different as night and day at first glance. As
an alumna of Taylor's Creek myself, my first visit to Hamilton High for
fieldwork was eye-opening. The neighborhoods surrounding the high school
oozed wealth and luxury. Lush, well-kept lawns separated by sturdy
wrought-iron fences dotted the street full of large and impressive
homes. I counted thirteen gleaming windows on the façade of one of the
houses. I realized I was finally approaching the school when I saw the
sign labelled "Student Parking." My own alma mater, Taylor's Creek, was
moderately small, with a modest 130 spaces or so in its parking lot
nestled between a grassy field used for overflow parking and a small
patch of woods. Hamilton High's student parking lot seemed comparable to
the local mall in Taylor's Creek with row upon row of glittering cars
stretching into the distance.

The inside of Hamilton High proved just as impressive. After several
long minutes searching for the entrance, as I had mistakenly approached
the school from the wrong direction (encountering building D first), I
finally admitted myself into the expansive building. This initial foray
to Hamilton served the purpose of introducing me to the media
coordinator there, Mrs. Danielle Foster. Mrs. Foster itemized the
surplus of college-readiness resources the school offered. A later
meeting at Hamilton with the director of the Career Information Center,
Ms. Sam Morris, only lengthened that massive list. The students of
Hamilton High have access to more resources than one person could ever
use. The CIC and the media center provide books, pamphlets, flyers,
websites, and more about North Carolina colleges and universities, the
benefits of community college, financial aid, scholarships, college
applications, resume building and writing, study abroad, internships,
standardized testing preparation, and learning styles. The CIC, guidance
office, media center, and the administration work together to publicize
events that allow students to take advantage and continually utilize the
resources provided by Hamilton High School.

On the contrary, Taylor's Creek High School, confined to one building
with a media center approximately half the size of Hamilton High's,
cannot even host a real college fair anymore, according to assistant
principal, Mrs. Adrienne Mitchell. Two local universities and a
technical college try to send a representative during the school year. I
had the opportunity to speak to Mrs. Peggy Miller, the media
coordinator, Mrs. Jennifer Caldwell, the AIG (Academically
Intellectually Gifted) coordinator, and Mrs. Mitchell. The three women
agreed that more needed to be done for students intending to pursue a
higher education, let alone first generation college students. Mrs.
Caldwell identified herself as a potentially untapped resource for
non-AIG students seeking information about college. However, there is
only so much she can do for the students of Taylor's Creek. Mrs.
Caldwell splits her time between Taylor's Creek and another local high
school. Additionally, some of the resources she provides, including
field trips to North Carolina colleges and universities, are only
available to students identified as AIG.

Philip McMichael describes "three large obstacles to overcome…within the
current global development model": inequality, uneven development, and
economism (McMichael 2008). While he uses these terms in a broader
global context, they are necessary analytics for this small slice of
local education. The concepts of inequality and unevenness of
development are obvious when the two schools are compared. The most
current report from the North Carolina Department of Commerce ranks
Orange County as the third least economically distressed county in the
state, while Cumberland County is the twenty-seventh most distressed (NC
Department of Commerce 2015). The funding disparities are evident when
comparing the resources provided by each school, and even the schools
themselves. Mrs. Miller, the media coordinator at Taylor's Creek High
School, lamented her inability to do more for the rising first
generation college students attending Taylor's Creek. "I'm working with
one third of the funding I used to have. One third." This lack of
funding makes remaining up to date with the ever-changing information
pertaining to standardized testing and scholarships nearly impossible,
as she must also maintain the remainder of the collection.
Alternatively, Mrs. Foster and Ms. Morris at Hamilton High School spoke
freely about being able to provide current resources with few concerns
of funding issues.

Individual schools, while pieces of a larger state, national, and global
object "education," act as infrastructure spaces, a concept introduced
by Keller Easterling in her book Extrastatecraft. "Infrastructure space
has become a medium of information…Infrastructure space is doing
something," (Easterling 2014). Framing schools as mediums of information
is not a stretch. Schools facilitate the exchange of information,
currently through concept formation and standardized tests. Schools are
"doing something" by creating the spaces necessary to assist their
students to move beyond the education provided to them. However, the
inequality and unevenness of Development even within North Carolina
produce unequal and irregular infrastructure spaces, namely Hamilton
High School and Taylor's Creek High School. Even within these highly
localized areas, broad global concepts can be applied to explain
situational phenomena.

Development fosters Infrastructure, as is apparent by the vastly
different infrastructure spaces created by Hamilton and Taylor's Creek.
Hamilton, in the more developed, less economically distressed county, is
able to generate a more-involved college-readiness space because its
resources are not spread as thinly as Taylor's Creek's. The unevenness
of Development, and therefore Infrastructure, within North Carolina can
be traced back over fifty years to the Appalachia Report and still
farther to Segregation. This infrastructure space facilitates the agency
of its own students to take control of their educational futures. Across
the world, regions are separated by their ability to provide education
opportunities. "Developed" nations serve as blueprints for education
infrastructure spaces, but funding disparities further distance the
areas from each other. These infrastructure spaces facilitate the agency
of their own students to take control of their educational futures.

\
\

\
\

***Bibliography***

\
\

Appalachian Regional Commission. A Report by the President's Appalachian
Regional Commission 1964 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office,
1964).

Easterling, Keller. Extrastatecraft: The Power of Infrastructure Space
(London: Verso, 2014).

McMichael, Philip. Development and Social Change: A Global Perspective
(California: Pine Forge Press, 2008).

North Carolina Department of Commerce. 2016 North Carolina Tier
Development Designations (North Carolina: Labor & Economics Analysis Division, 2015).
